Name                      EXAM III Physics 218
                                          Section Number

                       USEFUL INFORMATION

                      If f(x) = kx          =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A')

      If f(x) = kx                        1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 --

                                    =

                       [2

                           d= tot  mv2(2) -- mv2(i)

If P is conservative:

                           F d= 2 ) -[U( ) U 1 ](
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -

and
                                                                          8U

                                    I=

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /

                                                                              3,
1. (25 points)Derive the expressions for the r and i components of the velocity and
   acceleration.
2
3. tOop(h2bleii5ssceam oprtevhoocesitindieotrfsnvot)oreAcolebntelsotymhhvaaucatlnlortsyaiolc6bwttsjhwieteochhnteortobitemhfjeeImeictoiaasbsrcesjckeaoncicrnothdweiiinstsngmtoahntnoeodvaoe6sr6(fitrg)siioiscnti.ttohh3 cnealtetasnistwgslsheuderirssfehataoc1cnew.cneisBbfkereonclomoawwus.tneh.eToChfoeoraingasciniondrgnel--iers

Y                                                     6ct

a. Find the object's velocity as a function of time.

b. Find the torque about the origin that is exerted on the object as a function of time.
4. (25 points)A block is moving with a known velocity of magnitude V along the x axis
   on a frictionless table. It explodes into three pieces that remain in the plane of the
   table. The pieces have masses mi, 2 r,n and 3 rn and the first two pieces have velocities
   v1 arid L'2 as shown, with 9 a known angle. Find the direction of the velocity of the
   third piece.

                   I ,7 vz

                                       cu
