Physics 218: Mechanics Exam 3, 20 November 2007
Print your name neatly:

Last name:

First name:

Sign your name:

Your instructor:                              Your section:

Please fill in your Student ID number (UIN):     ­­

                             IMPORTANT

                         Read these directions carefully:

· There are 4 problems totalling 100 points. Check your exam to make sure you have all
  the pages. Work each problem on the page the problem is on. You may use the back.
  If you need extra pages, I have plenty up front.

· Each problem with its associated figure is self explanatory. If you must ask a question,
  then come to the front, being as discrete as possible so as not to disturb others.

· Indicate what you are doing! We cannot give full credit for merely writing down
  the answer. Neatness counts! I will give generous partial credit if I can tell that you
  are on the right track. This means you must be neat and organized.

· There is potentially useful information on the last page. Do not waste time on complex
  algebra or arithmetic.

Grading:                                                     TOTAL
               Problem 1 Problem 2 Problem 3 Problem 4
1a. (20 points) Derive the expressions for the ir and i components of the velocity and
     acceleration.

1b. (5 points) An object of mass m is moving in the x, y plane. Its position varies with
     time so that a vector from the origin to the object has a length given by kt2 where k
     is a known constant and t is the time in seconds. The vector points at an angle with
     the x axis that varies according to bt2 where b is a known constant.
     What is the force, as a function of time, acting on the object?
2. (25 points) In an experiment a small ball with            S

   mass mb hangs from a massless rod of length S. It      0                                mb
   starts at rest in the position shown, swings down
                                                      m1
   and strikes a small object, mass m1, which is at
   rest on a frictionless surface.

a. If the object sticks to the ball, how high will the ball go after striking the object?

b. If instead of sticking to the ball the object bounces off it, so that the collision is
   perfectly elastic, write down the equations that could be solved for how high will the
   ball go. DO NOT SOLVE THE EQUATIONS
                                                                               S            S

3. (25 points) A man stands on a massless platform                                                 m
   that is free to rotate in the horizontal plane. He                                          0
   holds a weight in each hand that has mass m. He

   has his arms extended so that they have length S. m

   The system is set into rotation so that the angular
   velocity of the platform is 0.

a. Assume the man's mass can be neglected compared to the weights. What force would

   have to be applied to one of the weights at the distance S so that in t0 seconds the
   platform, which is initially at rest, is rotating with angular velocity 0?

b. Assuming the man's mass can be neglected compared to the weights, what would be

the angular velocity of the system if he starts with angular velocity 0 and then brings
                                                                                      S
his  arms  in  so  that  the  distance   from  his  center  is  reduced  from  S  to  4  ?

c. If instead of being massless assume the man can be considered to be a cylinder with

moment of inertia Iman about an axis through his center. He is again set spinning with
his arms, considered massless, extended a distance S and still holding the masses, m.

His initial angular velocity is again 0 and he brings his arms in as before so that the
                                   S
distance   is  again  reduced  to  4  .  What  will  the  new   angular  velocity  be?
4. (25 points) A rod of mass M length S is free to rotate in the vertical plane about a
   frictionless pin through one end. The moment of inertia about the end is I. The rod
   is uniform so that the force of gravity acts at its center.
                   Frictionless
                   Hinge
               Uniform Rod, Length S Mass M

                                                                                                          X

                                                           Point c
a. What is the torque exerted on the rod by gravity about the pin when the rod is

   horizontal?

b. If the right end of the rod is released from rest find the acceleration a of the point
   marked c at the right end when the rod is horizontal.

c. What is the torque exerted on the rod by gravity about the pin when the rod is vertical?

d. If the right end of the rod is released from rest find the acceleration a of the point
   marked c at the right end when the rod is vertical, in terms of f , its angular velocity.
                 You may remove this page
If you do remove this page, then do not turn it in!

                       USEFUL INFORMATION

                       If f (x) = kxn                 df    =  nkxn-1
                                                      dx

If f (x) = kxn                            B  f (x)dx  =    n  1  1 k(Bn+1  -  An+1)
                                         A                    +

                        r2  Ftot  ·  dr  =   1  mv2  (r2)  -  1  mv2(r1)
                       r1                    2                2

If F is conservative:

                                                         r2

                                        F · dr = -[U (r2) - U (r1)]

                                                       r1

and

                            Fx    =  -   U           Fy  =  -  U
                                         x                     y

                       L = r × p  = r × F I = miri2

DO NOT WASTE TIME DOING ARITHMETIC

                 You may remove this page
If you do remove this page, then do not turn it in!
